Chief Pharmaceutical Officer  
Professor Cathy Harrison 
 
 
Circular HSC (SQSD) (NICE NG240) 15/24 
 
 
 
 
Subject: NICE Clinical Guideline NG240 - 
Meningitis (bacterial) and meningococcal 
disease: recognition, diagnosis and management 
(updates and replaces CG102) 
Circular Reference: HSC (SQSD) (NICE NG240) 15/24 
  
 Date of Issue: 03 July 2024 
  
For action by: 
Chief Executive of Public Health Agency – for distribution to: 
Director of Public Health and Medical Director – for 
cascade to relevant staff 
             Director of Nursing and AHPs – for cascade to relevant      
staff 
 
Chief Executives of HSC Trusts – for distribution to: 
            Medical Directors – for cascade to relevant staff 
            Directors of Nursing – for cascade to relevant staff 
            Heads of Pharmaceutical Services – for cascade to relevant 
            staff 
            Directors of Acute Services – for cascade to relevant staff 
            HSC Clinical and Social Governance Leads 
            Directors of Social Services – for cascade to relevant staff 
            Directors of Finance – for cascade to relevant staff 
            AHP Leads – for cascade to relevant staff 
             
Chief Executive, Regulation & Quality Improvement Authority – for 
cascade to: relevant independent healthcare establishments 
 
Chief Executives of HSC Special Agencies and NDPBs 
 
Related documents: 
HSC (SQSD) 13/22 
HSC (SQSD) (NICE NG195) 31/21 
 
For Information to: 
Chair of Public Health Agency 
Chairs of HSC Trusts 
Chair of RQIA 
NICE Implementation Facilitator NI 
Members of NI NICE Managers’ Forum 
 
Superseded documents 
HSC (SQSD) (NICE CG102) 26/2011 
Summary of Contents: 
This guideline covers recognising, diagnosing and managing 
bacterial meningitis and meningococcal disease in babies, children, 
young people and adults. It aims to reduce death and disability by 
helping healthcare professionals recognise meningitis and treat it 
quickly and effectively. 
 
Status of Contents: 
Action 
Enquiries: 
Any enquiries about the content of this Circular should be 
addressed to: 
NICE Lead 
Medicines Access Branch  
Department of Health 
Room D4.18 
Castle Buildings 
Stormont Estate 
Belfast 
BT4 3SQ 
Implementation: 
As per circular.  Generally, Clinical Guidelines should be 
implemented within 12 months of endorsement.   
 Additional copies: 
SGU-NICEGuidance@health-ni.gov.uk 
 
Available to download from  
https://www.health-ni.gov.uk/topics/safety-and-quality-
standards/national-institute-health-and-care-excellence-nice 
 

 
 
  
Dear Colleagues 
NICE Clinical Guideline NG240 - Meningitis (bacterial) and meningococcal disease: 
recognition, diagnosis and management (updates and replaces CG102) - 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng240 
 
The Department has recently reviewed the above NICE guidance and has formally endorsed 
it as applicable in Northern Ireland.   
 
In accordance with the process outlined in circular HSC (SQSD) 13/22, (https://www.health-
ni.gov.uk/sites/default/files/publications/health/doh-hsc-sqsd-13-22.pdf) the following actions 
should be taken: 
 
1. PHA  
a. In conjunction with the Strategic Planning and Performance Group (SPPG) 
Department of Health, identify Commissioning and Professional Leads who will 
consider the commissioning implications of the Clinical Guideline and co-
ordinate with any other relevant commissioning teams. The Lead / Leads will 
identify any areas where regional planning / investment / commissioning are 
required, or where there is material risk to safety or quality. These will then be 
actioned immediately through normal commissioning arrangements or through 
bespoke arrangements reflecting the nature of the issue / risk.   
 
2. HSC Trusts  
a. Proceed with targeted dissemination, agree a Clinical / Management Lead to 
coordinate implementation and consider what has to be done to achieve 
implementation using a risk based assessment and baseline review as 
appropriate to support planning. These initial actions should be undertaken 
within a 3 month period. 
 
b. Implement the Guideline within a further 9 months (apart from any elements 
where significant issues have been raised with the SPPG). 
 
c. Provide positive assurances to the SPPG that the required initial actions have 
been taken within the 3 month planning period and that the Guideline has been 
implemented within a further 9 months, where appropriate. 
 
d. Where significant investment / commissioning needs cannot be met within the 
usual timeframe, notify the SPPG at the earliest opportunity through the routine 
Director-level service issues and performance meetings and agree appropriate 
arrangements with them to achieve implementation. 
 
e. It is also recognised that it may not be appropriate for a HSC Trust to 
implement every single recommendation. A risk based assessment can be 
used to ensure that all significant safety and quality improvements are 
achieved.   
 
f. Where NICE indicate that a recommendation is critical, in terms of service 
users’ safety and / or outcomes, the Department expects HSC Trusts to 
implement the guidance.  However, this does not override the responsibility of 
clinicians to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of an individual 
service user. These decisions should be taken in consultation with the 
individual (or their family/ carer/ guardian). 
 
 
 
  
3. RQIA 
a. Disseminate the Guideline to the independent sector as appropriate. 
 
4. HSC Special Agencies and NDPBs 
a. Take account of this Guideline in training and other developments as 
appropriate. 
 
To inform the planning process, please find attached details from the Departmental review. 
You should consider and take account of other relevant Departmental policies and strategies 
in your planning and implementation of this guideline, as well as any legislative / policy 
caveats identified in the course of the Departmental review. 
 
A full current list of NICE guidance endorsed for application in Northern Ireland can be found 
on the Department’s website at https://www.health-ni.gov.uk/topics/safety-and-quality-
standards/national-institute-health-and-care-excellence-nice 
 
With thanks for your work in implementing this NICE Clinical Guideline – NG240. 
 
 
 
Professor Cathy Harrison 
Chief Pharmaceutical Officer  
 

 
 
  
Appendix 1 
 
Endorsed NICE guidance - Details from Departmental review 
 
Reference Number NICE Clinical Guideline – NG240 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng240 
Title  
 
Meningitis (bacterial) and meningococcal disease: 
recognition, diagnosis and management 
Summary of 
guidance 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE Clinical 
Guideline CG102 - Meningitis (bacterial) and 
meningococcal septicaemia in under 16s: recognition, 
diagnosis and management (endorsed by DoH in May 
2011). 
The guideline covers recognising, diagnosing and 
managing bacterial meningitis and meningococcal 
disease in babies, children, young people and adults. It 
aims to reduce death and disability by helping 
healthcare professionals recognise meningitis and treat 
it quickly and effectively. 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
➢ recognising bacterial meningitis and 
meningococcal disease 
➢ transfer to hospital and antibiotics before arrival 
at hospital 
➢ investigations for suspected bacterial meningitis 
➢ antibiotics for bacterial meningitis 
➢ investigations for suspected meningococcal 
disease 
➢ antibiotics for meningococcal disease 
➢ follow-up care before hospital 
discharge and after hospital discharge 
For recommendations on meningitis in babies up 
to and including 28 days corrected gestational age, 
see NICE Clinical Guideline: 
➢ NG195 - Neonatal infection: antibiotics for 
prevention and treatment (endorsed by DoH in 
November 2021) – 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng195 
This guideline does not cover people with 
immunodeficiency, confirmed viral, tuberculous or 
fungal meningitis, confirmed viral encephalitis, brain 
tumours, hydrocephalus, intracranial shunts, previous 
neurosurgical procedures, or known cranial or spinal 
anomalies that increase the risk of bacterial meningitis. 
 
 
  
Related strategically 
relevant DoH/ HSC 
policies 
None 
Inter-Departmental 
interest 
None 
Legislative / policy 
caveats 
This advice does not override or replace the individual 
responsibility of health professionals to make 
appropriate decisions in the circumstances of their 
individual patients, in consultation with the patient 
and/or guardian or carer. This would, for example, 
include situations where individual patients have other 
conditions or complications that need to be taken into 
account in determining whether the NICE guidance is 
fully appropriate in their case. 
Where this guidance refers to NICE Clinical Guideline 
CG174 on Intravenous fluid therapy in adults in 
hospital, Northern Ireland healthcare professionals 
should refer to the DoH endorsement at: 
https://www.health-
ni.gov.uk/sites/default/files/publications/dhssps/hsc-
sqsd-nice-cg174-17-14.pdf 
This guideline refers to Public Health England's 
guidance on meningococcal disease. The equivalent 
resource in Northern Ireland is available at: 
https://www.publichealth.hscni.net/directorate-public-
health/health-protection/meningococcal-disease 
It should be noted that this guidance contains some 
recommendations for off-label use of medicines.  
Trusts and practitioners must be aware of their 
responsibilities and ensure that appropriate polices are 
in place when medicines are used off-label. 
This guidance makes reference to Medicines Practice 
guidance which is not covered under the current 
service level agreement between the Department and 
NICE and therefore not endorsed by the DoH.