





















Acromegaly
 - NHS






















































































Skip to main content












NHS
















Search the NHS website














Search


























Acromegaly


Acromegaly is a rare condition where the body makes too much of a hormone that can make parts of your body grow bigger. It can be successfully treated.














Symptoms of acromegaly


Symptoms of acromegaly can develop slowly. They may include:
swollen hands and feet
tiredness or difficulty sleeping
sleep apnoea
sweating
numbness and weakness in your hands
abnormal height growth in children and teenagers (gigantism)
body growth – feet, fingers, head, tongue and neck may increase in size
headaches
joint pain
thicker, more oily skin
a deeper voice
irregular periods
erection problems
You usually get acromegaly between the ages of 30 and 50 years old, but you can get symptoms at any age.














Non-urgent advice:  
See a GP if:
      










you think you may have acromegaly
Early diagnosis and treatment can stop symptoms getting worse.










Causes of acromegaly


Acromegaly is usually caused by an adenoma (a 
non-cancerous tumour
) in the pituitary gland. This is a pea-sized gland at the back of your brain. An adenoma can cause you to produce too much growth hormone.
Acromegaly is not usually passed on from your parents (inherited).






What happens at your appointment


Acromegaly may take time to be diagnosed.
If the GP thinks you have it, they may ask to see photographs of you from the past couple of years to check any changes.
They may also refer you to a specialist for tests, including:
blood tests
an 
MRI scan
 of your brain to see if you have a tumour






Treatments for acromegaly


Treatments for acromegaly can include:
surgery to remove the tumour
radiotherapy to target the tumour and reduce growth hormone levels
injections or tablets to reduce growth hormone levels
Treatment usually stops your body producing too much growth hormone and usually improves your symptoms.
After treatment, you'll continue to have appointments with a specialist. They can monitor how well your pituitary gland is working and check that your treatment is right for you.






Complications of acromegaly


Acromegaly can increase your risk of:
type 2 diabetes
high blood pressure (hypertension)
heart disease
bowel polyps
You'll have regular health checks to monitor these conditions, including colonoscopy screenings to check for bowel polyps.






Recording information about you and your condition


If you have acromegaly, your care team will pass information on to the 
National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Disease Registration Service (NCARDRS)
.
This helps scientists find better ways to treat and prevent this condition. You can opt out of the register at any time.








Information: 


Find out more
The Pituitary Foundation









    Page last reviewed: 19 December 2024

    Next review due: 19 December 2027
  





























