Chief Pharmaceutical Officer  
Professor Cathy Harrison 
 
 
Circular HSC (SQSD) (NICE NG243) 19/24 
 
 
 
 
Subject: NICE Clinical Guideline NG243 - Adrenal 
insufficiency: identification and management 
Circular Reference: HSC (SQSD) (NICE NG243) 19/24 
  
 Date of Issue: 21 October 2024  
  
For action by: 
Chief Executive of Public Health Agency – for distribution to: 
Director of Public Health and Medical Director – for 
cascade to relevant staff 
             Director of Nursing and AHPs – for cascade to relevant      
staff 
 
Chief Executives of HSC Trusts – for distribution to: 
            Medical Directors – for cascade to relevant staff 
            Directors of Nursing – for cascade to relevant staff 
            Heads of Pharmaceutical Services – for cascade to relevant 
            staff 
            Directors of Acute Services – for cascade to relevant staff 
            HSC Clinical and Social Governance Leads 
            Directors of Social Services – for cascade to relevant staff 
            Directors of Finance – for cascade to relevant staff 
            AHP Leads – for cascade to relevant staff 
             
Chief Executive, Regulation & Quality Improvement Authority – for 
cascade to: relevant independent healthcare establishments 
 
Chief Executives of HSC Special Agencies and NDPBs 
 
Related documents: 
HSC (SQSD) 13/22 
 
For Information to: 
Chair of Public Health Agency 
Chairs of HSC Trusts 
Chair of RQIA 
NICE Implementation Facilitator NI 
Members of NI NICE Managers’ Forum 
 
Superseded documents 
None 
Summary of Contents: 
This guideline covers identifying and managing adrenal 
insufficiency (hypoadrenalism) in babies, children, young people 
and adults. It aims to improve the treatment of primary, secondary 
and tertiary adrenal insufficiency, and the prevention and 
management of adrenal crisis. 
 
Status of Contents: 
Action 
Enquiries: 
Any enquiries about the content of this Circular should be 
addressed to: 
NICE Lead 
Medicines Access Branch  
Department of Health 
Room D4.18 
Castle Buildings 
Stormont Estate 
Belfast 
BT4 3SQ 
Implementation: 
As per circular.  Generally, Clinical Guidelines should be 
implemented within 12 months of endorsement.   
 Additional copies: 
SGU-NICEGuidance@health-ni.gov.uk 
 
Available to download from  
https://www.health-ni.gov.uk/topics/safety-and-quality-
standards/national-institute-health-and-care-excellence-nice 
 

 
 
  
Dear Colleagues 
NICE Clinical Guideline NG243 - Adrenal insufficiency: identification and management 
- https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng243 
 
The Department has recently reviewed the above NICE guidance and has formally endorsed 
it as applicable in Northern Ireland.   
 
In accordance with the process outlined in circular HSC (SQSD) 13/22, (https://www.health-
ni.gov.uk/sites/default/files/publications/health/doh-hsc-sqsd-13-22.pdf) the following actions 
should be taken: 
 
1. PHA  
a. In conjunction with the Strategic Planning and Performance Group (SPPG) 
Department of Health, identify Commissioning and Professional Leads who will 
consider the commissioning implications of the Clinical Guideline and co-
ordinate with any other relevant commissioning teams. The Lead / Leads will 
identify any areas where regional planning / investment / commissioning are 
required, or where there is material risk to safety or quality. These will then be 
actioned immediately through normal commissioning arrangements or through 
bespoke arrangements reflecting the nature of the issue / risk.   
 
2. HSC Trusts  
a. Proceed with targeted dissemination, agree a Clinical / Management Lead to 
coordinate implementation and consider what has to be done to achieve 
implementation using a risk based assessment and baseline review as 
appropriate to support planning. These initial actions should be undertaken 
within a 3 month period. 
 
b. Implement the Guideline within a further 9 months (apart from any elements 
where significant issues have been raised with the SPPG). 
 
c. Provide positive assurances to the SPPG that the required initial actions have 
been taken within the 3 month planning period and that the Guideline has been 
implemented within a further 9 months, where appropriate. 
 
d. Where significant investment / commissioning needs cannot be met within the 
usual timeframe, notify the SPPG at the earliest opportunity through the routine 
Director-level service issues and performance meetings and agree appropriate 
arrangements with them to achieve implementation. 
 
e. It is also recognised that it may not be appropriate for a HSC Trust to 
implement every single recommendation. A risk based assessment can be 
used to ensure that all significant safety and quality improvements are 
achieved.   
 
f. Where NICE indicate that a recommendation is critical, in terms of service 
users’ safety and / or outcomes, the Department expects HSC Trusts to 
implement the guidance.  However, this does not override the responsibility of 
clinicians to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of an individual 
service user. These decisions should be taken in consultation with the 
individual (or their family/ carer/ guardian). 
 
 
 
 
  
3. RQIA 
a. Disseminate the Guideline to the independent sector as appropriate. 
 
4. HSC Special Agencies and NDPBs 
a. Take account of this Guideline in training and other developments as 
appropriate. 
 
To inform the planning process, please find attached details from the Departmental review. 
You should consider and take account of other relevant Departmental policies and strategies 
in your planning and implementation of this guideline, as well as any legislative / policy 
caveats identified in the course of the Departmental review. 
 
A full current list of NICE guidance endorsed for application in Northern Ireland can be found 
on the Department’s website at https://www.health-ni.gov.uk/topics/safety-and-quality-
standards/national-institute-health-and-care-excellence-nice 
 
With thanks for your work in implementing this NICE Clinical Guideline – NG243. 
 
 
 
Professor Cathy Harrison 
Chief Pharmaceutical Officer  
 

 
 
  
Appendix 1 
 
Endorsed NICE guidance - Details from Departmental review 
 
Reference Number NICE Clinical Guideline – NG243 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng243 
Title  
 
Adrenal insufficiency: identification and 
management 
Summary of 
guidance 
This guideline covers identifying and managing adrenal 
insufficiency (hypoadrenalism) in babies, children, young 
people and adults. It aims to improve the treatment of 
primary, secondary and tertiary adrenal insufficiency, 
and the prevention and management of adrenal crisis. 
The guideline includes recommendations on: 
➢ initial identification and referral 
➢ routine pharmacological management 
➢ management 
during physiological or psychological stress 
➢ when to suspect adrenal crisis 
➢ emergency management of adrenal crisis 
➢ ongoing care and monitoring 
➢ managing glucocorticoid withdrawal to prevent 
adrenal insufficiency 
Related strategically 
relevant DoH/ HSC 
policies 
None 
Inter-Departmental 
interest 
None 
Legislative / policy 
caveats 
This advice does not override or replace the individual 
responsibility of health professionals to make 
appropriate decisions in the circumstances of their 
individual patients, in consultation with the patient and/or 
guardian or carer. This would, for example, include 
situations where individual patients have other 
conditions or complications that need to be taken into 
account in determining whether the NICE guidance is 
fully appropriate in their case. 
This guidance refers to The Young Carers (Needs 
Assessment) Regulations (2015). Northern Ireland 
health/social care professionals should refer to Articles 
17A and 18 of The Children (Northern Ireland) Order 
1995. Available at: 
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/nisi/1995/755/article/17A   
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/nisi/1995/755/article/18 
 
 
  
In Northern Ireland, an HSC Steroid Emergency Card to 
support early recognition and treatment of adrenal crisis 
in adults is available to HSC providers in primary and 
secondary care. Supplies can be ordered from BSO by 
e-mailing pharmacystationeryorders@hscni.net. The 
Card can also be downloaded from the NI Formulary 
website at: HSCB Steroid Emergency Card | NI 
Formulary (hscni.net).   
It should be noted that this guidance contains some 
recommendations for off-label use of medicines. Trusts 
and practitioners must be aware of their responsibilities 
and ensure that appropriate polices are in place when 
medicines are used off-label. 
This guidance makes reference to NICE Social Care 
guidance which has not been endorsed by the DoH.