





















Acid and chemical burns
 - NHS






















































































Skip to main content












NHS
















Search the NHS website














Search


























Acid and chemical burns


Get medical advice as soon as possible if you think you have an acid or chemical burn. You'll need to be treated as soon as possible.














How acid or chemical burns happen


Acid or chemical burns can happen when a harmful acid or chemical gets on your skin, or in your eyes.
Examples of harmful acids and chemicals include:
bleach
other household cleaning products, such as toilet, oven, and drain cleaners
battery acid (a liquid inside some types of batteries)
washing detergents
ammonia
chemicals used in industries such as farming, manufacturing, construction and laboratories




Information: 


Many products have a label saying if they're harmful and if there's a risk of burns.
















Immediate action required: 
Call 999 if:
      










you or someone else has got an acid or chemical on your skin, or in your eyes










First aid for an acid or chemical burn


An acid or chemical burn needs immediate first aid.
Call 999 for medical help.
Wear gloves to protect yourself from the chemical when helping yourself or someone else, if possible.
Carefully remove any clothing that has the chemical on it, if possible.
Carefully brush dry chemicals off the skin.
Put the affected area under cool or lukewarm running water or pour lots of water over it for about 1 hour.







      
        Important
      
    


Do not put anything on the burn, such as skin creams or other chemicals.










Treatment for acid and chemical burns


Acid and chemical burns need to be checked and treated in hospital.
You may need:
painkillers to help ease pain
antibiotics to treat infection, or to stop you getting an infection
fluids, usually given through a vein
If your burn is severe, you may also need:
surgery to help your burn wounds to heal
reconstructive surgery if your burn affects your movement or physical appearance
physiotherapy if the burn has a lasting effect on your movement







    Page last reviewed: 05 June 2024

    Next review due: 05 June 2027
  





























