





















Reflux in babies
 - NHS






















































































Skip to main content












NHS
















Search the NHS website














Search


























Reflux in babies


Reflux is when a baby brings up milk, or is sick, during or shortly after feeding. It's very common and usually gets better on its own.














Symptoms of reflux in babies


Reflux usually starts before a baby is 8 weeks old and gets better by the time they're 1.
Symptoms of reflux in babies include:
bringing up milk or being sick during or shortly after feeding
coughing or hiccupping when feeding
being unsettled during feeding
swallowing or gulping after burping or feeding
crying and not settling
not gaining weight as they're not keeping enough food down
Sometimes babies may have signs of reflux but will not bring up milk or be sick. This is known as silent reflux.






Things you can try to ease reflux in babies


It's common for a baby under the age of 1 to bring up a little bit of milk during or shortly after a feed, without being distressed. Your baby does not usually need to see a doctor if they have reflux, as long as they're happy, healthy and gaining weight.
If symptoms of reflux seem to be bothering your baby, there are things you can do to help.





    Do
  












ask a health visitor for advice and support












get advice about your baby's 
breastfeeding position
 or 
how to bottle feed your baby












hold your baby upright during feeding and for as long as possible after feeding












burp your baby regularly during feeds












make sure your baby sleeps flat on their back (they should not sleep on their side or front)











    Don’t
  












do not raise the head of their cot or Moses basket




















Non-urgent advice:  
See a GP if your baby:
      










is not improving after trying things to ease reflux
gets reflux for the first time after they're 6 months old
is older than 1 and still has reflux
is not gaining weight or is losing weight


















Urgent advice: 
Ask for an urgent GP appointment or call NHS 111 if your baby:
      










has vomit that's green or yellow, or has blood in it
is projectile vomiting (being sick with more force than usual)
has blood in their poo
has a swollen or tender tummy
has a very high temperature, or they feel hot, cold or shivery
keeps being sick and cannot keep fluid down
has diarrhoea that lasts for over a week or has signs of dehydration
will not stop crying and is very distressed
is refusing to feed
Also call your GP or 111 if you have any other concerns about your baby.










Treatment for reflux in babies


A GP or specialist may want to check whether your baby has an allergy to cow's milk, because the symptoms can be very similar to reflux. If there's no sign of cow' milk allergy, they may recommend treatments for reflux.
If your baby is formula-fed, they may recommend:
a powder that's mixed with formula, to thicken it
a pre-thickened formula milk
If the thickening powder does not help or your baby is breastfed, a GP or specialist might recommend medicines that help with distress from reflux and stop their stomach from producing as much acid.
Very rarely, surgery might be needed to strengthen the muscle that stops food or milk travelling back up. This is usually only after trying other things or if their reflux is severe.






Causes of reflux


Reflux usually happens because the ring of muscle inside your baby's food pipe (oesophagus) can be weak, which allows milk to come back up easily.
This muscle will get stronger as your baby gets older and the reflux should stop.







    Page last reviewed: 10 June 2025

    Next review due: 10 June 2028
  





























