Chief Pharmaceutical Officer  
Professor Cathy Harrison 
 
 
Circular HSC (SQSD) (NICE NG245) 2/25 
 
 
 
 
Subject: NICE Clinical Guideline NG245 - Asthma: 
diagnosis, monitoring and chronic asthma 
management (BTS, NICE, SIGN) (updates and 
replaces NG80 and TAs 10, 38,131 & 138) 
Circular Reference: HSC (SQSD) (NICE NG245) 2/25 
  
 Date of Issue: 24 January 2025  
  
For action by: 
Chief Executive of Public Health Agency – for distribution to: 
Director of Public Health and Medical Director – for 
cascade to relevant staff 
             Director of Nursing and AHPs – for cascade to relevant      
staff 
 
Chief Executives of HSC Trusts – for distribution to: 
            Medical Directors – for cascade to relevant staff 
            Directors of Nursing – for cascade to relevant staff 
            Heads of Pharmaceutical Services – for cascade to relevant 
            staff 
            Directors of Acute Services – for cascade to relevant staff 
            HSC Clinical and Social Governance Leads 
            Directors of Social Services – for cascade to relevant staff 
            Directors of Finance – for cascade to relevant staff 
            AHP Leads – for cascade to relevant staff 
             
Chief Executive, Regulation & Quality Improvement Authority – for 
cascade to: relevant independent healthcare establishments 
 
Chief Executives of HSC Special Agencies and NDPBs 
 
Related documents: 
HSC (SQSD) 13/22 
NICE NG244 - Asthma pathway (BTS, NICE, SIGN) 
For Information to: 
Chair of Public Health Agency 
Chairs of HSC Trusts 
Chair of RQIA 
NICE Implementation Facilitator NI 
Members of NI NICE Managers’ Forum 
 
Superseded documents 
HSC (SQSD) (NICE NG80) 02/18 
HSC (SQSD) (NICE) 30/08 TA131 
HSC (SQSD) (NICE) 10/09 TA138 
Summary of Contents: 
This guideline covers diagnosing, monitoring and managing 
asthma in adults, young people and children. It aims to improve the 
accuracy of diagnosis, help people to control their asthma and 
reduce the risk of asthma attacks. It does not cover managing 
severe asthma or acute asthma attacks. 
 
Status of Contents: 
Action 
Enquiries: 
Any enquiries about the content of this Circular should be 
addressed to: 
NICE Lead 
Medicines Access Branch  
Department of Health 
Room D4.18 
Castle Buildings 
Stormont Estate 
Belfast 
BT4 3SQ 
Implementation: 
As per circular.  Generally, Clinical Guidelines should be 
implemented within 12 months of endorsement.   
 Additional copies: 
SGU-NICEGuidance@health-ni.gov.uk 
 
Available to download from  
https://www.health-ni.gov.uk/topics/safety-and-quality-
standards/national-institute-health-and-care-excellence-nice 
 

 
 
  
Dear Colleagues 
NICE Clinical Guideline NG245 - Asthma: diagnosis, monitoring and chronic asthma 
management (BTS, NICE, SIGN) (updates and replaces NG80 and TAs 10, 38,131 & 138) 
- https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng245 
 
The Department has recently reviewed the above NICE guidance and has formally endorsed 
it as applicable in Northern Ireland.   
 
In accordance with the process outlined in circular HSC (SQSD) 13/22, (https://www.health-
ni.gov.uk/sites/default/files/publications/health/doh-hsc-sqsd-13-22.pdf) the following actions 
should be taken: 
 
1. PHA  
a. In conjunction with the Strategic Planning and Performance Group (SPPG) 
Department of Health, identify Commissioning and Professional Leads who will 
consider the commissioning implications of the Clinical Guideline and co-
ordinate with any other relevant commissioning teams. The Lead / Leads will 
identify any areas where regional planning / investment / commissioning are 
required, or where there is material risk to safety or quality. These will then be 
actioned immediately through normal commissioning arrangements or through 
bespoke arrangements reflecting the nature of the issue / risk.   
 
2. HSC Trusts  
a. Proceed with targeted dissemination, agree a Clinical / Management Lead to 
coordinate implementation and consider what has to be done to achieve 
implementation using a risk based assessment and baseline review as 
appropriate to support planning. These initial actions should be undertaken 
within a 3 month period. 
 
b. Implement the Guideline within a further 9 months (apart from any elements 
where significant issues have been raised with the SPPG). 
 
c. Provide positive assurances to the SPPG that the required initial actions have 
been taken within the 3 month planning period and that the Guideline has been 
implemented within a further 9 months, where appropriate. 
 
d. Where significant investment / commissioning needs cannot be met within the 
usual timeframe, notify the SPPG at the earliest opportunity through the routine 
Director-level service issues and performance meetings and agree appropriate 
arrangements with them to achieve implementation. 
 
e. It is also recognised that it may not be appropriate for a HSC Trust to 
implement every single recommendation. A risk based assessment can be 
used to ensure that all significant safety and quality improvements are 
achieved.   
 
f. Where NICE indicate that a recommendation is critical, in terms of service 
users’ safety and / or outcomes, the Department expects HSC Trusts to 
implement the guidance.  However, this does not override the responsibility of 
clinicians to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of an individual 
service user. These decisions should be taken in consultation with the 
individual (or their family/ carer/ guardian). 
 
 
 
  
3. RQIA 
a. Disseminate the Guideline to the independent sector as appropriate. 
 
4. HSC Special Agencies and NDPBs 
a. Take account of this Guideline in training and other developments as 
appropriate. 
 
To inform the planning process, please find attached details from the Departmental review. 
You should consider and take account of other relevant Departmental policies and strategies 
in your planning and implementation of this guideline, as well as any legislative / policy 
caveats identified in the course of the Departmental review. 
 
A full current list of NICE guidance endorsed for application in Northern Ireland can be found 
on the Department’s website at https://www.health-ni.gov.uk/topics/safety-and-quality-
standards/national-institute-health-and-care-excellence-nice 
 
With thanks for your work in implementing this NICE Clinical Guideline – NG245. 
 
 
 
Professor Cathy Harrison 
Chief Pharmaceutical Officer  
 

 
 
  
Appendix 1 
Endorsed NICE guidance - Details from Departmental review 
Reference Number NICE Clinical Guideline – NG245 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng245 
Title  
 
Asthma: diagnosis, monitoring and chronic asthma 
management (BTS, NICE, SIGN) 
Summary of 
guidance 
This guideline updates and replaces the following NICE Clinical 
Guideline and Technology Appraisals which have been 
previously endorsed by DoH: 
➢ NG80 - Asthma: diagnosis, monitoring and chronic 
asthma management (endorsed by DoH in January 2018) 
➢ TA131 - Inhaled corticosteroids for the treatment of 
chronic asthma in children under the age of 12 years 
(endorsed by DoH in July 2008) 
➢ TA138 - Inhaled corticosteroids for the treatment of 
chronic asthma in adults and in children aged 12 years 
and over (endorsed by DoH in February 2009). 
It also updates and replaces the following Technology Appraisals 
which were published by NICE prior to the Department’s link to 
the Institute: 
➢ TA10 - Guidance on the use of inhaler systems (devices) 
in children under the age of 5 years with chronic asthma 
(published in August 2000)  
➢ TA38 - Inhaler devices for routine treatment of chronic 
asthma in older children (aged 5 to 15 years) (published 
by NICE in March 2002) 
The guideline covers diagnosing, monitoring and managing 
asthma in adults, young people and children. It aims to improve 
the accuracy of diagnosis, help people to control their asthma 
and reduce the risk of asthma attacks. It does not cover 
managing severe asthma or acute asthma attacks. 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
➢ initial assessment 
➢ objective tests for diagnosing asthma and diagnosing 
asthma in children under 5 
➢ diagnosing occupational asthma 
➢ monitoring asthma control 
➢ pharmacological treatment including, treatment for people 
aged 12 and over, children aged 5 to 11 and children 
under 5 
➢ decreasing maintenance therapy 
➢ asthma in pregnancy and breastfeeding 
➢ asthma in adolescents 
➢ adherence and self-management 
➢ risk-stratified care 
➢ organisation and delivery of care  
 
 
  
Related strategically 
relevant DoH/ HSC 
policies 
None 
Inter-Departmental 
interest 
None 
Legislative / policy 
caveats 
This advice does not override or replace the individual 
responsibility of health professionals to make appropriate 
decisions in the circumstances of their individual patients, in 
consultation with the patient and/or guardian or carer. This 
would, for example, include situations where individual patients 
have other conditions or complications that need to be taken into 
account in determining whether the NICE guidance is fully 
appropriate in their case. 
BTS, NICE and SIGN have developed an asthma pathway 
(NG244), which brings together recommendations on 
diagnosing, monitoring and managing asthma in adults, young 
people and children. It aims to improve the accuracy of 
diagnosis, help people to control their asthma and reduce the 
risk of asthma attacks. It also covers managing difficult and 
severe asthma and acute asthma attacks. The Department has 
considered NG244 as applicable in Northern Ireland. Healthcare 
professionals should refer to this resource for a complete 
pathway regarding asthma care - 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng244 
It should be noted that this guidance contains some 
recommendations for off-label use of medicines. Trusts and 
practitioners must be aware of their responsibilities and ensure 
that appropriate polices are in place when medicines are used 
off-label. 
This guidance makes reference to NICE Social Care guidance 
which has not been endorsed by the DoH.